Jack Sparrow was a legendary pirate of the Seven Seas and the irreverent trickster of the Caribbean. A captain of equally dubious morality and sobriety, a master of self-promotion and self-interest, he fought a constant and losing battle with his own best tendencies while living the pirate's life. Sparrow may be the best or worst pirate, depending on whose opinion to take into account, and was the quickest to seize the moment and make it his own; whether by cause and careful planning or mere accident was a matter of debate, but the results were the same and always different. He had been cursed, left for and come back from the dead, and seen his fair share of the supernatural through mythical beings, ghosts, zombies, mermaids, and other eldritch creatures, as well as becoming the center of various myths and legends himself. Captain Jack Sparrow's first love was the sea, his second his beloved ship the Black Pearl, and desired freedom and adventure more than any material treasure.

The son of Pirate Lord and Keeper of the Code Captain Edward Teague, Jack was born on a pirate ship in a typhoon. Before he became known as "Captain Jack Sparrow" he was simply known as Jack Sparrow, an adventure-seeking teenage stowaway, struggling to find his place on the Seven Seas and following his enigmatic father's buccaneering footsteps. In his first year at sea, young Jack sailed on a series of adventures with a ragtag crew aboard the Barnacle, beginning with a quest to locate and procure the legendary Sword of Hernán Cortés. In the time following his earliest adventures, Jack earned the name "Jack the Sparrow" after a sea battle with the Silent Mary, which he defeated and sunk along with its merciless captain, Armando Salazar, also known as El Matador del Mar or "The Butcher of the Sea". After his encounter with rogue pirates, Jack was forced to abandon the pirate life and pursued a legitimate career as a merchant seaman for the East India Trading Company. After five years of faithful service, the wily sailor was given command of the Wicked Wench, a ship owned by Cutler Beckett, the EITC Director for West Africa. As Beckett's employee, Sparrow searched for the magical island of Kerma and its treasure, until he decided to betray Beckett and keep the island and its inhabitants safe from Beckett and his slave traders. When Beckett ordered him to transport a cargo of humans as slaves to the Bahamas, promising to sell him the Wench for just one shilling, Sparrow chose to liberate them instead and stole the Wench from Beckett. However, Beckett's men managed to find Jack and branded him as a pirate, irrevocably returning Sparrow to a life of piracy, while the Wench was set aflame and sunk. After striking a bargain with the fearsome Davy Jones, the ghastly cursed captain of the ghostly Flying Dutchman, in which his beloved vessel was raised from the depths, Jack had the Wicked Wench rechristened as the Black Pearl and began the life of a pirate anew. Shortly afterwards, Jack Sparrow became one of the nine Pirate Lords of the Brethren Court, with Sparrow himself being the new Lord of the Caribbean Sea.

Now one of the most infamous and notorious pirates of the Caribbean, Captain Jack Sparrow embarked on many adventures. He was captain of the Black Pearl for two years, during which time he searched for the Shadow Gold. But when Jack had set out on a venture to find the treasure of Isla de Muerta, he lost the Pearl in a mutiny led by his first mate, Hector Barbossa, then marooned Jack on an island with a pistol and one bullet. Ten years later, with the help of Will Turner and Elizabeth Swann, Jack killed the cursed Captain Barbossa and retrieved the Black Pearl. Over a year later, Sparrow's old comrade Bootstrap Bill appeared to remind him that he owed Davy Jones his soul. Sparrow sought to seize the Dead Man's Chest to settle his debt, but despite his efforts, Elizabeth left Jack to Jones' leviathan, the Kraken, which dragged both captain and ship to the depths of Davy Jones' Locker. Following a desperate quest to rescue both Sparrow and the Pearl from the Locker led by the resurrected Captain Barbossa, the Brethren Court convened in one last stand against Lord Cutler Beckett, who had control over Davy Jones and the Flying Dutchman, which led to a pirate showdown with the East India Company. Jack later sailed on stranger tides during the quest for the fabled Fountain of Youth. After being kidnapped and forced aboard the Queen Anne's Revenge, Sparrow was forced to serve under Captain Blackbeard and his beautiful daughter Angelica, facing zombies, mermaids, and the Spanish. With the help of his nemesis and now privateer Hector Barbossa, Jack found the fountain and defeated Blackbeard. Later, pursued by the terrifying Captain Salazar and a cursed crew of deadly ghosts who escaped from the Devil's Triangle, a down-on-his-luck Captain Jack sought to reverse his recent spate of ill fortune by searching for the Trident of Poseidon. Sparrow's only hope of survival lied in Henry Turner, the gallant son of his allies Will and Elizabeth who sought to free his cursed father; and Carina Smyth, Barbossa's daughter and a brilliant astronomer accused of being a witch. In an uneasy alliance with Henry, Carina and Hector Barbossa, Sparrow was able to find the Trident and defeat Salazar.

Over the course of time, Captain Jack Sparrow became a center of intrigue as myths and legends have been told of the famed pirate's exploits. Most of these tales, however, were exaggerations, or even fabrications, embellished by the indomitable trickster himself to bolster his reputation. He also navigated his way from one perilous adventure to another, enemies became allies and friends became foes. Indeed, despite his dishonesty and many deceptions, Jack did embark on a number of grand and thrilling adventures, some involving the supernatural, magic, and journeys in discovering hidden treasures of pirate lore. This crafty pirate valued his freedom and his ship above all else. Jack Sparrow's ultimate ambition was to sail the seas aboard the Black Pearl, drinking bottles of rum, and living the best life—the pirate's life.

Arriving to Port Royal
"Well, then, I confess: it is my intention to commandeer one of these ships, pick up a crew in Tortuga, raid, pillage, plunder and otherwise pilfer my weaselly black guts out."
―Jack Sparrow to Mullroy and Murtogg[src]
Jack and Sinking Jolly Mon COTBP
Jack Sparrow's arrival to Port Royal.

The Jolly Mon plowed towards Port Royal, while Jack stood on the rigging, gazing keen-eyed at the harbor. Noticing that his boat was filling up with water, he jumped down to bail it out. Jack then spotted skeletal remains of three pirates, still clad in buccaneer rags, hanging from gallows erected from a rocky promontory along with a fourth unoccupied gallows bearing a sign that said "Pirates Ye Be Warned". Pausing, Jack Sparrow took off his hat and placed it above his heart—a moment of exaggerated respect for the doomed pirates as he sailed by them. As Jack reached the port, his boat kept sinking lower and lower until he made it to the docks, where only the mast was visible above water. Jack offered the harbormaster three shillings to ensure his name did not appear on the ledger. The Harbormaster accepted this bribe, though did not notice Jack stealing his purse before the pirate swaggered away to find a suitable ship for him to sail on.[1]

First duel Will and Jack 3
Jack before fighting Will Turner.

Striding through the docks to "commandeer" the Interceptor, Jack Sparrow was accosted by two royal marines, Mullroy and Murtogg, who were assigned to guard the Interceptor and make sure the docks stay off limits to civilians. The two marines and Jack soon engage in idle conversation before they were interrupted by a young lady falling from Fort Charles. Despite his piratical nature, Jack was not about to let the girl, Elizabeth Swann, drown, and dived into the ocean to rescue her. Bringing her up to the harbor, Jack tore off her corset, allowing her to breathe; he then spied a strange coin fastened around her neck, one of the pieces of Aztec gold Barbossa's men were seeking. However, before he could explore the situation further, Commodore James Norrington arrived to arrest Sparrow.[1]

Despite having saved Governor Weatherby Swann's daughter, Elizabeth Swann, Commodore Norrington saw Jack's mark from the East India Trading Company. The Governor then ordered Jack to be hanged. However, Jack held Elizabeth hostage, ensuring the return of his effects before making his daring escape. With Norrington's men in pursuit, Jack sought refuge in a blacksmith's shop, where he cut his manacles. However, he was soon confronted by the blacksmith's apprentice, William Turner, whose face Sparrow vaguely recognized, who engaged the pirate in a sword fight. Sparrow won, through a mixture of skill and pirate trickery, but Turner refused to stand down. Jack was resolute he would not shoot Turner, thus wasting his single shot, and was preoccupied enough with this quandary for John Brown to knock him unconscious.[1]

Jack grabbed
Jack Sparrow in Fort Charles prison.

When Sparrow came to, he found himself incarcerated in Fort Charles, which soon came under attack by a fog-shrouded pirate ship, the Black Pearl, as Jack immediately identified it. During the fight, as Jack was luring the Prison Dog to him, the pirates Koehler and Twigg happened upon Jack's cell, and inadvertently revealed to Jack the existence of the curse of Cortés upon Barbossa's men. Jack remained in the cell throughout the attack, but, the next morning, was visited again; this time by Will Turner, who made a deal with Jack to help him reach the Black Pearl's port and rescue the captive Elizabeth. Jack agreed, and immediately set about acquiring a ship.[1]

Escape to Tortuga
"Thank you Commodore for getting us ready to make way! We'd have had a hard time of it by ourselves!"
―Jack Sparrow taunting Commodore Norrington after stealing the Interceptor[src]
Jack and Will
Sparrow and Turner aboard the HMS Dauntless.

After escaping the prison, Jack Sparrow and Will Turner planned to commandeer the Royal Navy's flagship, HMS Dauntless, in order to commandeer Norrington's faster ship, the Interceptor. Sparrow and Turner used cunning and guile to board and commandeer the Dauntless, which was summarily boarded by Norrington's men. However, the pirates slipped away, unnoticed, and boarded the Interceptor. They then used it to flee Port Royal and leaving the Dauntless with its rudder chain disabled. The two pirates headed for Tortuga to find a crew for the Interceptor, for they can't crew one ship on their own.[1]

Anamaria ship
Jack Sparrow picking his crew.

After arriving to Tortuga, and some less-than pleasant reunions with two jealous prostitutes, Scarlett and Giselle, Jack tracked down his old friend, Joshamee Gibbs. Jack explained to Gibbs his plan to follow the Black Pearl's trail to Isla de Muerta, and to use Will as leverage to reacquire the Pearl from Barbossa. Gibbs agreed to the plan and helped Jack assemble a crew. After an interesting reunion with Anamaria, Jack and his new crew set sail on the Interceptor, following Jack's navigation by his strange compass to Isla de Muerta.[1]

At some point during the journey, the Interceptor encountered the British merchant vessel Earl King, captained by McGlue. Jack and Will disguised as Royal Navy officers and boarded the King, but Captain McGlue realized that they're pirates. The crew of the Interceptor boarded the King, captured the entire crew, and looted the ship.[49]

Isla de Muerta
"I'm going after the Black Pearl...I know where it's going to be, and I'm gonna take it."
"Jack, it's a fool's errand. You know better than me the tales of the Black Pearl."
"That's why I know what Barbossa is up to. All I need is a crew."
"From what I hear tell of Captain Barbossa, he's not a man to suffer fools, nor strike a bargain with one."
"Well, then I'd say it's a very good thing I'm not a fool, then, eh?"
―Jack Sparrow and Joshamee Gibbs[src]
Jack Isla De Muerta COTBP
Captain Jack Sparrow confronting Barbossa in Isla de Muerta.

Thanks to the Interceptor's speed, the crew arrived at Isla de Muerta just after the Black Pearl, and Jack and Will went ashore. There, Jack witnessed the start of the ritual that Barbossa hoped would lift the curse, but complications arose in the shape of Will, who was far too impatient for Jack's liking. Jack implored Will to remain where he was so that Jack could implement his plan, but Will rashly knocked Jack unconscious and rescued Elizabeth himself. Turner took the girl back to the Interceptor, where he admitted Jack had fallen behind. Having sworn to keep to the Pirate's Code, Gibbs ordered the crew to set sail.[1]

"How the blazes did you get off that island?"
"When you marooned me on that godforsaken spit of land, you forgot one very important thing, mate…I'm Captain Jack Sparrow."
―Hector Barbossa and Jack Sparrow[src]
Meanwhile, Jack had woken up, and found himself surrounded by Barbossa's pirates. Invoking the right of parley, Jack was brought before Barbossa, and made a deal with him to procure the person whose blood would lift their curse, for Elizabeth's blood had had no effect. Jack was brought along as the pirates set sail to pursue the Interceptor, and found himself aboard his former ship for the first time in ten years.[1]

Battle with the Black Pearl
"Stop blowing holes in my ship!"
―Jack Sparrow to the crew of the Interceptor[src]
Jack Barbossa Black Pearl COTBP
Jack Sparrow and Barbossa before Jack is sent to the brig.

In the captain's cabin of the Black Pearl, Jack and Barbossa were negotiating about how and when Jack will reveal the name of the person's blood that Barbossa needs. When Barbossa expressed his mistrust in Jack's honesty, the former captain of the Black Pearl replied that of the two of them he was the only one who hadn't committed a mutiny, which meant his word was to be trusted. He also sarcastically thanked his former first mate for raising a mutiny that unintentionally saved him from being cursed by the Aztec gold like him.[1] There is also a version of events in which Jack told Barbossa the story about how he sacked Nassau without firing a single shot, and Barbossa declared it a lovely yarn, but he didn't believe a word of it.[15] To Jack's dismay, the Bo'sun of the Pearl came in and told Barbossa that they were close to the Interceptor. However, when he suggested to Barbossa that he attempt a negotiation with the Interceptor's crew, Jack was locked in the brig. As Barbossa said, that was the kind of attitude that had lost Sparrow the Pearl in the first place.[1]

Jack witnessed the ensuing battle from within his cell, but when a stray shot smashed the lock, he was able to return to the deck, and slyly helped his crew in the fight. Noticing Barbossa's monkey making off with the medallion, Jack gave chase, and once more found himself face-to-face with Barbossa aboard the Pearl. This time, Barbossa was not so lenient, and made Jack walk the plank. Accompanied by Elizabeth, Sparrow had no choice but to make for Rumrunner's Isle, the island he had been marooned on ten years earlier. Fortunately, Barbossa allowed Jack to keep his pistol, still with its single shot.[1]

Marooned
"'Must've been terrible for you to be trapped here, Jack. Must've been terrible for you—' Well, it bloody is now! [sees the HMS Dauntless offshore] There'll be no living with her after this."
―Jack Sparrow after Elizabeth Swann burned all of his supply of rum.[src]
18024-5-large
Jack, marooned by Barbossa again, with Elizabeth Swann.

Jack sadly noted to Elizabeth that it was the second time he had to watch as Barbossa sailed off with his beloved ship while stranded. With the rumrunners no longer operational, Jack had no plan of escape. Elizabeth then questioned Jack and his legends, after being told the truth about his last escape. Jack then responded by giving her rum. However, Elizabeth proved more cunning than Jack had expected. After getting him drunk and passed out, after singing "A Pirate's Life for Me", she proceeded to burn the rum caché. It was through the smoke signal that she hoped the ensuing fire would attract attention to the Royal Navy. Jack rubbished the plan, tempted to even shoot Elizabeth had he possessed more than one shot. But a short time later, help did indeed arrive in the form of the Dauntless, and both Jack and Elizabeth were rescued. This caused Jack to comment that Elizabeth would be impossible to live with.[1]

Deal with Barbossa
"I suppose in exchange, you want me not to kill the whelp."
"No, no, no. Not at all. By all means, kill the whelp. Just not yet. Wait to lift the curse until the opportune moment. For instance...After you've killed Norrington's men. Every last one."
[Jack steals an Aztec gold coin]
"You've been planning this from the beginning. Ever since you learned my name."
"Yeah."
―Hector Barbossa, Jack Sparrow, and Will Turner[src]
Jack Barbossa Isla De Muerta COTBP
Jack Sparrow and Barbossa negotiating in Isla de Muerta.

On board, Jack and Elizabeth persuaded Commodore Norrington to set after the Black Pearl and rescue Will, though yet again Jack had his own agenda. He coerced Norrington into allowing him to go ashore alone, and Jack once again confronted Barbossa in the treasure cave, just as the ritual began for a second time, this time with Will as the sacrifice. Jack stalled the proceedings and was able to convince "Commodore" Barbossa and the cursed crew to defeat Norrington before lifting their curse. During their negotiations, Jack managed to secretly steal one of the cursed coins from the stone chest. Barbossa sent all but a few of his men to attack the Royal Navy forces outside, while he, Jack and Will remained in the cave. It was at this point that Jack showed his true colors.[1]

The Immortal Captain Jack Sparrow
Fight on Isla de Muerta 3
Jack Sparrow fighting Barbossa.

"Whose side is Jack on?"
"At the moment?"
―Elizabeth Swann and Will Turner[src]
Stealing a sword from one of Barbossa's men, Jack threw the blade to Will, who fought Barbossa's men. At the same time, Jack pulled his sword out and engaged his former First Mate in a deadly duel, in which Barbossa seemed to gain the upper hand. The fight led them around the cave, until Barbossa cut it short by declaring that, as an immortal, Jack could not kill him. Sparrow tried anyway, but Barbossa merely sighed at the sword plunged into his body, and responded in kind, stabbing Jack in the gut. Victory was denied, however, when Jack stumbled backwards into a shaft of moonlight, transforming into a skeleton before Barbossa's shocked eyes. Holding aloft the medallion he had taken, Jack grinned triumphantly at his nemesis, and began the duel anew.[1]

Fight on Isla de Muerta 16
Jack Sparrow reveals that he is cursed.

"So what now, Jack Sparrow? Are we to be two immortals locked in an epic battle until judgment day and trumpets sound? Hmm?"
"Or you could surrender."
―Hector Barbossa and Jack Sparrow[src]
The duel seemed endless, although quite pointless, since both captains were immortal. When asked if they were to engage in this single duel until Judgement Day, Jack suggested that Barbossa could surrender. By this time, Elizabeth had joined Will in the cave, and, working together, they had dispatched the remaining cursed pirates. Noticing Will standing over the chest, Jack quickly cut his hand with his sword, staining his medallion with his blood and hurling it to Will, who did the same with his coin. Barbossa aimed at Elizabeth but Jack finally used his single shot, firing it into Barbossa's heart. Barbossa taunted him over a wasted shot but Will revealed his own bloody coin and dropped both the coins into the chest. Barbossa then realized he had been defeated before toppling backwards, dead.[1]

Fight on Isla de Muerta 21
Jack Sparrow and Hector Barbossa fighting as cursed skeletons.

Avenged and the curse now lifted from him, Jack set about searching through the treasure cave for items of particular value. However, upon his return to the open water, he discovered his crew had already departed on the Black Pearl, after Elizabeth had failed to convince them to stay and help in the fight. Jack had no choice but to accompany the Royal Navy back to Port Royal.[1]

Freedom
"Captain Sparrow. The Black Pearl is yours."
"...On deck, you scabrous dogs! Hands to braces! Let go and haul to run free! Now...Bring me that horizon. [hums to himself] And really bad eggs...Drink up me hearties, yo ho!"
―Anamaria and Jack Sparrow[src]
Jack Fort Charles COTBP
Jack escapes the Royal Navy at Fort Charles.

Arriving to Port Royal, Jack was sentenced to be executed at the gallows, for his crimes, to be hanged. He grimly awaited his fate in the courtyard of Fort Charles. However, Will Turner was also present, and staged a daring rescue of his comrade. Together, the two pirates fought Commodore Norrington's soldiers, but were ultimately surrounded by Royal Navy soldiers, Norrington, and Governor Swann. It was only when Elizabeth interference and decision to stand with them that Governor Swann ordered the soldiers to stand down and lower their weapons.[1]

Seizing his chance, and noticing a familiar parrot flying nearby, Jack Sparrow made his farewells and escape. Bragging to the soldiers, he accidentally toppled over the fort wall, falling into the harbor. Landing with a splash, Jack sputtered to the surface and gazed at the horizon. With a smile, his eyes landed on a familiar sight—the Black Pearl. Her black sails were no longer tattered and her sides gleamed in the bright sun. Grinning, Jack began to swim for it. In the face of this alarming chain of events, culminating in Elizabeth's profession of love for Will, Commodore Norrington decided not to immediately pursue Sparrow, giving him a day's head start to escape.[1]

Jack Last Scene COTBP
Captain Sparrow at the helm of the Black Pearl.

Out at sea, Jack swam close enough to the Black Pearl where he got heaved on board, where he was greeted by Gibbs and other members of the new crew of the Black Pearl. Jack asked Gibbs about not keeping to the Code. Gibbs said they figured the Code were more "guidelines" before helping Jack to his feet. Cotton, the mute pirate, gave Jack his tricornered hat before Anamaria stepped aside from the helm and gave "Captain Sparrow" his coat as well as command of the Black Pearl. Jack then ran a hand lovingly along the ship's wheel, feeling good and right in his hands, and smiled. He enjoyed it, until noticing his crew watching him, and then shifted to 'Captain' mode. Giving orders to his crew, Captain Jack Sparrow stood at the wheel of the Black Pearl. As he looked out to sea and felt the Pearl's wood beneath his fingers, Jack said, "Now...Bring me that horizon." Jack then began humming the pirate song Elizabeth taught him before under his breath, and in his hand he held his compass. He realized what he's doing and smiles. Setting a new course, Captain Jack Sparrow sailed his ship across the turquoise waves of the Caribbean, preparing to sail for new adventures on the high seas.[1]